CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing To Splinter

Contributions of any kind are welcome provided that:

- You add tests if new tests are needed,
- All existing / applicable tests pass
- Unit tests run Valgrind clean
- If more than trivial, you're willing to help maintain

Please review the code of conduct located at the root of this repository before
sending pull requests.

If your contribution is less than trivial and _isn't_ part of the current
development focus, it might be a good idea to open an issue to discuss the PR
first.

"Oddball" ideas are welcome, as long as they're grounded in some kind of real
work!

## The Maintainer Is A Brain Cancer Survivor

This is stated simply to set some expectations:

 - Pull requests may make sudden, erratic strides forward and then
   languish for a week or more. That's because the maintainer is doing
   exactly the same thing.

 - Chat environments, even asynchronous, aren't really accessible to the
   maintainer - this includes Discord. The maintainer also does not have 
   social media accounts, does not socialize outwardly and does not wish
   to be anyone's inspiration. I'm here to share code on the chance that
   you might find ways to improve it and share them with me.

 - Most of the maintainer's time is taken up actively doing research 
   even retired early due to disabilities because there's literally shit
   else to do in the current world but observe it. Splinter evolves 
   with the actual work that goes into falsifying theories, it doesn't 
   stagnate in "theoretical work"; there's a key difference between the
   two. PRs should be grounded in something you're _doing_, or at least
   _trying to do_. This helps optimize for _my time_, which is precious
   to me.

Commit message:

Revise contribution guidelines for clarity and tone
Clarify the maintainer's perspective on contributions and collaboration expectations.

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing To Splinter

Contributions of any kind are welcome provided that:

- You add tests if new tests are needed,
- All existing / applicable tests pass
- Unit tests run Valgrind clean
- If more than trivial, you're willing to help maintain

Please review the code of conduct located at the root of this repository before
sending pull requests.

If your contribution is less than trivial and _isn't_ part of the current
development focus, it might be a good idea to open an issue to discuss the PR
first.

"Oddball" ideas are welcome, as long as they're grounded in some kind of real
work!

## The Maintainer Is A Brain Cancer Survivor

This is stated simply to set some expectations:

 - Pull requests may make sudden, erratic strides forward and then
   languish for a week or more. That's because the maintainer is doing
   exactly the same thing.

 - Chat environments, even asynchronous, aren't really accessible to the
   maintainer - this includes Discord. The maintainer also does not have 
   social media accounts, does not socialize outwardly and does not wish
   to be anyone's inspiration. I'm here to share code on the chance that
   you might find ways to improve it and share them with me.

 - Most of the maintainer's time is taken up actively doing research 
   even into early disability retirement. Splinter evolves with the actual
   work that goes into falsifying theories, it doesn't stagnate forever in
   "theoretical work"; there's a key difference between the two. PRs should
   be grounded in something you're _doing_, or at least _trying to do_. This
   helps ground the weight of the immediate need (and gain from trying to
   implement it).

I'm very chill and laid back, easy to work with, provided that you understand
my brain is sometimes like Swiss cheese, and I rarely engage socially with 
people I didn't know pre-diagnosis.

Github is a very social, engagement-engineered place, so I want to be up-front
about what to expect in collaboration. Thanks for reading!
